Immersive medical virtual reality: still a novelty or already anecessity? Tobias Loetscher ,1 A M Barrett,2,3 Mark Billinghurst,4,5 Belinda Lange6
Virtual reality (VR) technologies have been explored for medical applications for over half a century. With major tech companies such as Meta (formerly Facebook), HTC and Microsoft investing heavily in the development of VR technologies, significant advancements have recently been made in hardware (eg, standalone headsets), ease of use (eg, gesture tracking) and equipment cost. These advancements helped spur research in the medical field, with over 2700 VRrelated articles indexed in PubMed alone in 2022, and the number of VR articles more than tripling in the last 6 years. Recently, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also approved the first VRbased therapy for chronic back pain.1
Whether the technology has reached a tipping point for its use in medicine is debatable, but it seems timely to provide a brief overview of the current state of immersive VR in neurology and related fields. In this editorial, we will discuss the characteristics of VR that make it a potentially transformative tool in healthcare, review some of the most mature VR solutions for medical use and highlight barriers to implementation that must be addressed before the technology can be widely adopted in healthcare. This editorial will focus solely on immersive VR technology and will not delve into the applications and use cases of augmented or mixed reality.
CHARACTERISTICS OF VR VR is a technology that allows users to interact with and experience a simulated environment.2 The technology typically involves the use of a headset or other device that displays a 3D computergenerated environment, as well as sounds and haptic feedback, and input devices to create a fully interactive immersive experience. The immersion establishes a sense of presence3a users subjective feeling that they are actually present in the virtual environment. This subjective sense of presence is modulated by the employed technology4 and is enhanced by the use of head tracking and other technologies that allow the user to move around within the virtual environment. Medical VR applications take advantage of the technologys ability to elicit emotional responses, convey spatial information and provide a sense of presence in a simulated environment. Typically, the applications use engaging VR experiences while providing a safe and controlled environment for failsafe practice, learning, distraction, relaxing or treatment.5
EXAMPLES OF MORE MATURE VR SOLUTIONS FOR MEDICAL USE The range of trialled medical VR applications is vast and their maturity varies widely, with some still being in the proofofconcept stage and others having been evaluated in highquality randomised control studies (RCTs). Some of the strongest evidence for the effectiveness of medical VR is in the areas of mental health interventions, pain management and medical training.
Mental health interventions VR has been shown to be an effective treatment for various psychological conditions, including phobias,6 Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)7 and anxiety disorders.7 For example, a singleblind RCT in 346 patients with psychosis found significant reductions in agoraphobic avoidance and distress in the VR plus usual care group compared with the usual care group.8 Patients with severe avoidance at baseline demonstrated large VR treatment effects even
at the 6month followup.8 A metareview of 11 metaanalyses on VR therapies for psychiatric disorders found mediumtolarge effects for anxietyrelated disorders when compared with inactive controls. However, no meaningful differences were found when VR was compared with standard evidencebased interventions.9 The lack of statistically significant differences necessitates thoughts and further research into the best use cases for each intervention.
Pain management VR is effective as an intervention to control acute pain during medical procedures.10 11 For example, a randomised, crossover study reported a 39% reduction in opioid medication when using VR during painful medical procedures compared with the nonVR condition.12 While less researched than VR interventions for acute pain,13 there are also promising results for chronic pain management.14 This includes an athome VR intervention for chronic lower back pain, which produced clinically meaningful symptom reduction in pain intensity and painrelated interference.15 While these findings are encouraging, more rigorous highquality RCT studies are needed13 and unanswered questions about the optimal frequency and dosage of interventions, as well as the durability of any treatment effects remain.
Medical training There is evidence that VR can be an effective tool for medical training16 in addition to its use with patients. For example, VR simulations can improve surgical skills, especially in comparison to nonVR traditional training.17 A metaanalysis of 15 RCT studies using VR to teach anatomy found moderately improved anatomy test scores compared with other teaching approaches.18 There is also emerging evidence that VR simulations are useful for nontechnical skills, such as training empathy,19 that are essential for providing highquality patient care.
BARRIERS TO IMPLEMENTATION The accumulated evidence for the effectiveness of at least some medical VR applications will aid in the removal of roadblocks to their implementation. Some of the most significant barriers to broader adoption of medical VR in hospitals, which are not necessarily mutually exclusive, include:
1Cognitive Ageing and Impairment Neurosciences, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia 2UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA 3VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System, Leeds, Massachusetts, USA 4Australian Research Centre for Interactive and Virtual Environments, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia 5Empathic Computing Laboratory, The University of Auckland, Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand 6College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia, Australia
Correspondence to Dr Tobias Loetscher, Cognitive Ageing and Impairment Neurosciences, University of South AustraliaMagill Campus, Magill, SA 5072, Australia; tobias. loetscher@ unisa. edu. au
Content Current medical VR knowledge is primarily based on the evaluation of research prototypes. The heterogeneity of the VR systems (eg, display type, method and amount of interaction) and the content (eg, how the tasks and activities are introduced, presented and measured) impact outcomes. The lack of generalisation, combined with a lack of standardisation, makes demonstrating evidence for specific VR applications timeconsuming and costly. As a result, there are currently very few readily available commercial VR applications to choose from that have proven their effectiveness.
Data use and regulatory barriers Uncertainty around regulations related to data collection, storage, ownership and use are considerable barriers to use of VR. There may be regulatory obstacles to implementing VR technology in hospitals, such as obtaining approval from relevant governing bodies before using the technology. In the USA, for example, the FDA regulates medical devices, including VR technology used in a medical setting. Hospitals may also be required to follow other medical technologyrelated regulations, such as those governing patient privacy and data security. The parent companies of two leading VR headset manufacturers (Meta and ByteDance) operate social media platforms that collect large amounts of personal data for advertising and other purposes. Good solutions must be found to ensure that the collected data is not misused or disclosed without the individuals consent. These regulatory requirements can increase the cost and complexity of implementing VR in hospitals, potentially impeding immediate widespread adoption.
Proof of costeffectiveness The costeffectiveness of VR technology in hospitals has not yet been well established. One study found that VR therapy for pain management saved US$5.39 per patient, compared with usual care, due to lower opioid use and hospital length of stay.20 A randomised clinical trial in senior orthopaedic surgery residents found that not only was VR training superior to technical video training for the acquisition of procedural knowledge and decisionmaking, but it was also 34.1 times more costeffective than the control group training.21 A return on investment analysis for a US$300 000
VR delivery (including staff, equipment, software and consumables) revealed a loss of US$38 and cost savings of US$6.79, with 5000 and 20 000 hospital admissions, respectively.20 The analysis, done with the assumption of a 19.3% eligibility and acceptance rate for VR pain interventions, nicely demonstrates the importance of scale.
Competency development Lack of training and familiarity is a major barrier to the adoption of VR technology. Technological competence, knowledge of the safe use of VR (eg, monitoring for cybersickness, infection control, mitigating the risk of physical hazards such as falls) and the selection of appropriate VR content for a specific patient are required. Many healthcare professionals will lack the necessary skills to use VR effectively. The issue of competency development is amplified by the rapid pace of hardware and VR application developments, with new versions being introduced constantly and headsets becoming outdated within years. The rapidly evolving medical VR field poses significant challenges for developing and sustaining staff competency. A lack of competency undermines not only the acceptability to use the technology, but also impedes buyin from all stakeholders, including clinicians, senior administrators and IT professionals.
CONCLUSIONS Advances in VR technology and the accumulating evidence for the effectiveness of VR for some medical applications in the last decade are promising. They provide critical stepping stones towards the wider adoption of medical VR. Further evidence demonstrated in highquality trials,1013 linking applications to theoretical frameworks,13 shedding light on mediating outcome factors (eg, content, dosage, frequency, patient characteristics), improving ease of use, and evidence for VRs costeffectiveness are required for broader acceptance and medical VR uptake.
The high level of academic research activity, combined with massive investments from established companies such as Meta, and the rise of numerous startup companies in the field provide an ecosystem that has the potential to drive the growth and adoption of medical VR. However, moving from development and pilot evaluation activities to commercially available and evidencebased VR applications will take time and
a widespread use in the medical field is still years away. While VR is undeniably a promising technology, it still has a long way to go before becoming a necessity and to live up to its potential to transform healthcare.
Contributors TL drafted the manuscript. All coauthors provided critical feedback, edited the draft and approved the final version for submission.
Funding The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or notforprofit sectors.
Competing interests No commercial entities provided support for this work. MB has been supported by Meta, Amazon and Google for work on augmented and virtual reality not related to this work. BL has a working relationship with Penumbra.
 Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial reuse. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.
To cite Loetscher T, Barrett AM, Billinghurst M, etal. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2023;94:499501.
marketing of virtual reality system for chronic pain reduction. 2021. Available: https://www.fda.gov/ newsevents/pressannouncements/fdaauthorizesmarketingvirtualrealitysystemchronicpainreduction [Accessed 15 Dec 2022].
 3 Schuemie MJ, van der Straaten P, Krijn M, etal. Research on presence in virtual reality: A survey. Cyberpsychol Behav 2001;4:183201.
 4 Cummings JJ, Bailenson JN. How immersive is enough? A metaanalysis of the effect of immersive technology on user presence. Media Psychology 2016;19:272309. 
 5 Rizzo A, Koenig SL. Clinical virtual reality: the state of the science. In: Brown GG, Crosson B, Haaland KY, etal., eds. Handbook on Neuropsychology Vol 2 Neuroscience and neuromethods. American Psychological Association, 2022.
 6 Eshuis LV, van Gelderen MJ, van Zuiden M, etal. Efficacy of immersive PTSD treatments: a systematic review of virtual and augmented reality exposure therapy and a metaanalysis of virtual reality exposure therapy. J Psychiatr Res 2021;143:51627.
 7 van Loenen I, Scholten W, Muntingh A, etal. The effectiveness of virtual reality exposurebased cognitive behavioral therapy for severe anxiety disorders, obsessivecompulsive disorder, and
 8 Freeman D, Lambe S, Kabir T, etal. Automated virtual reality therapy to treat agoraphobic avoidance and distress in patients with psychosis (gamechange): a multicentre, parallelgroup, singleblind, randomised, controlled trial in england with mediation and moderation analyses. Lancet Psychiatry 2022;9:37588.
 9 Dellazizzo L, Potvin S, Luigi M, etal. Evidence on virtual realitybased therapies for psychiatric disorders: metareview of metaanalyses. J Med Internet Res 2020;22:e20889.
 10 Indovina P, Barone D, Gallo L, etal. Virtual reality as a distraction intervention to relieve pain and distress during medical procedures: a comprehensive literature review. Clin J Pain 2018;34:85877.
 11 Baker NA, Polhemus AH, Haan Ospina E, etal. The state of science in the use of virtual reality in the treatment of acute and chronic pain: a systematic scoping review. Clin J Pain 2022;38:42441.
 12 McSherry T, Atterbury M, Gartner S, etal. Randomized, crossover study of immersive virtual reality to decrease opioid use during painful wound care procedures in adults. J Burn Care Res 2018;39:27885.
 13 Trost Z, France C, Anam M, etal. Virtual reality approaches to pain: toward a state of the science. PAIN 2021;162:32531.
 14 Goudman L, Jansen J, Billot M, etal. Virtual reality applications in chronic pain management: systematic review and metaanalysis. JMIR Serious Games 2022;10:e34402.
 15 Garcia LM, Birckhead BJ, Krishnamurthy P, etal. An 8week selfadministered athome behavioral skillsbased virtual reality program for chronic low back pain: doubleblind, randomized, placebocontrolled trial conducted during COVID19. J Med Internet Res 2021;23:e26292.
 16 Barteit S, Lanfermann L, Brnighausen T, etal. Augmented, mixed, and virtual realitybased headmounted devices for medical education: systematic review. JMIR Serious Games 2021;9:e29080.
 17 Mao RQ, Lan L, Kay J, etal. Immersive virtual reality for surgical training: a systematic review. J Surg Res 2021;268:4058.
 18 Zhao J, Xu X, Jiang H, etal. The effectiveness of virtual realitybased technology on anatomy teaching: a metaanalysis of randomized controlled studies. BMC Med Educ 2020;20:127.
 19 Martingano AJ, Hererra F, Konrath S. Virtual reality improves emotional but not cognitive empathy: a metaanalysis. Technology, Mind, and Behavior 2021;2.
 20 Delshad SD, Almario CV, Fuller G, etal. Economic analysis of implementing virtual reality therapy for pain among hospitalized patients. NPJ Digit Med 2018;1:22.
 21 Lohre R, Bois AJ, Pollock JW, etal. Effectiveness of immersive virtual reality on orthopedic surgical skills and knowledge acquisition among senior surgical residents: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3:e2031217.
